A person cannot sell, solicit, or negotiate insurance in this state unless licensed for the appropriate line(s) of authority. The purpose of licensing is to ensure that a producer meets educational and ethical standards required to fulfill producer's responsibilities to the insurer and to the public. Licensing regulations set out the requirements, procedures, and fees relating to the qualification, licensure, and appointment of insurance producers.

1. Types of Licensees
Producer
Producers licensed in the state of New Jersey may be authorized to write the following kinds of insurance (lines of authority):

Life;
Accident and health or sickness;
Variable life and variable annuity*;
Property;
Casualty;
Personal lines;
Surplus lines;
Title insurance; and
Limited lines, including:
Bail bonds;
Car rental insurance;
Credit insurance;
Ticket insurance;
Travel insurance;
Group mortgage cancellation;
Legal insurance;
Self-storage personal property insurance; and
Special nonresident limited lines.
*Note that in order to transact variable insurance products a person must hold a securities license in addition to the producer license.

To qualify for a producer license, candidates must meet the following requirements:

Be 18 years of age or older;
Submit the NAIC uniform licensing application and pay the required fees;
Complete an approved prelicensing education course before submitting the licensing application (unless exempt);
Pass a licensing examination no longer than 1 year before submitting a licensing application;
If applying as a resident, be a resident of New Jersey or plan to engage in business at an office in this state;
Plan to engage in insurance business with the public and not principally for one's own accounts or accounts of the producer's family or business associates (controlled business); and
Be deemed of good reputation and character, and have no prior convictions of a crime or moral turpitude.
The applicants for a license are also required to submit fingerprints to the Commissioner and written consent for a criminal history record background check. The applicant will be responsible for the cost of the background check.

Insurance producers who solicit insurance must first identify themselves by name to each person solicited, as well as state the name of the insurer or insurance producer they represent, and the nature of their relationship with that insurer or producer.

Producer licenses must include the licensee's name, address, personal identification number, date of issuance, lines of authority, expiration date, and any other information deemed necessary by the Commissioner.

Producers must also keep the license at the business address on file with the Department, and display it to any insured or prospective insured on request.

Business Entity
The Commissioner may issue a resident insurance producer license to a business entity that meets all of the following qualifications:

Is domiciled in New Jersey or is authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in New Jersey;
Has completed an application, signed by each partner or officer who holds an insurance producer license;
Is worthy of a license, and the partners or officers are of good reputation, good moral character, and have not been convicted of any crime compromising their fitness for licensure as an insurance producer;
Will engage in the insurance business with the general public and not for its own account; and
Has at least one partner or officer who holds a valid insurance producer license.
A producer license will not be issued to a business entity operated by a person who has had their license revoked within the past 10 years.

Nonresident
Producer
A nonresident producer is an individual who is domiciled and licensed as a resident producer in a state other than New Jersey. A nonresident can transact insurance in New Jersey by obtaining a nonresident producer license. The nonresident producer must meet the following requirements:

Currently hold a license in the same authority of insurance in their state of residence;
Submit the proper request for licensure and pay the fees;
Submit or transmit to the Commissioner the application for licensing from the home state or a completed uniform application.
For the protection of consumers in this state, nonresident producers must appoint the Commissioner as their agent to receive service of original legal process in New Jersey. (Any court order intended for a nonresident producer can be delivered to the Commissioner.)

If moving the residence or primary place of business to New Jersey, a nonresident producer must notify the Department of the change of address and contact information within 30 days. Within 90 days of change in resident status in the prior state, the producer must notify the Department of the request to qualify as a resident insurance producer in New Jersey, and submit completed fingerprint form, including electronic fingerprints. Upon submission of all required and approved forms, the licensee's status will be changed from nonresident to resident.

Business Entity
Like nonresident producers, nonresident business entities can obtain nonresident licenses as long as they meet all of the qualifications required of resident producer business entities (other than location). They, too, must already possess resident licenses in their home state of residency.

Surplus Lines
A surplus lines agent is a person or organization that is allowed to write business in New Jersey for insurance companies that do not possess a certificate of authority in New Jersey if no authorized insurers in New Jersey offer the specific type of insurance in question.

Applicants for surplus lines authority must:

Be New Jersey residents; and
Hold a property and casualty license.
Surplus lines producers cannot charge any fees to an originating broker in connection with the negotiation of any contract of surplus lines insurance that exceed an amount set forth by the Commissioner, plus the actual costs incurred for any services performed by a person that is not associated with the surplus lines producer (such as inspection services). The Commissioner may request information from surplus lines license holders at any time regarding the volume of surplus lines business transacted.

2. Obtaining a License
Prelicensing Requirements
Prior to being admitted to the state licensing examination, an applicant must complete 20 hours of prelicensing education for each line of authority that the licensee intends to transact. The course taken must include education regarding the regulations of the insurance industry in New Jersey. Self-study courses and courses taken online may be counted toward prelicensing education.

All applicants for a resident insurance producer license must pass the state licensing examination.

The Commissioner may waive the prelicensing education if the applicant holds a professional designation approved by the Commissioner in the kind of insurance for which the applicant seeks authority.

The Department recognizes the following professional designations as acceptable substitutes for the producer education and examination requirements (except continuing education):

For Life, Accident and Health or Sickness, and Variable Life and Variable Annuity authorities:

Certified Employee Benefits Specialist (CEBS);
Chartered Financial Consultant (ChFC);
Certified Insurance Counselor (CIC);
Certified Financial Planner (CFP);
Chartered Life Underwriter (CLU);
Fellow, Life Management Institute (FLMI); or
LUTC Fellow (LUTCF);
Registered Health Underwriter (RHU);
Certified Employee Benefits Specialist (CEBS);
Registered Employee Benefits Consultant (REBC); or
Health Insurance Associate (HIA);
For Property, Casualty, Personal Lines, Bail Bonds and Surplus Lines authorities:

Accredited Adviser in Insurance (AAI);
Associate in Risk Management (ARM);
Certified Insurance Counselor (CIC); or
Chartered Property & Casualty Underwriter (CPCU);
An applicant seeking to rely on a recognized professional designation to satisfy any education or examination requirements must submit adequate proof of such achievement, including an official document or transcript issued by the organization conferring the designation.

Applicants who previously held a New Jersey insurance license which was terminated as a condition of public employment are exempt from re-examination, provided that the public employment was in an insurance-related field and the license application is made within 1 year of termination of that employment.

Any individual previously licensed and in good standing with another state who applies for an insurance producer license in New Jersey will not be required to complete any prelicensing education or examination. The application must be received by the Department within 90 days of the cancellation of the previous license.

The Commissioner may, by order, require a licensee or applicant to retake the licensing examination. The order must clearly state the reasons for such requirement. A licensee's license will remain effective pending the results of the new examination unless otherwise suspended or revoked. The licensee or applicant so ordered may appeal the Commissioner's decision within 10 days of receiving the order to retake the examination.

Temporary Work Authority
After completing the procedural steps required for obtaining a producer license, an applicant may have to wait some time before the license is actually issued. An applicant may begin working as a producer immediately, after completing all the required procedures, by obtaining a temporary work authority. The temporary work authority expires no more than 60 days after it is issued and becomes ineffective when the actual license is issued.

Exemption from Licensing
An insurance producer license is not required of any officer, director or employee of an insurer or organizations employed by insurers, provided they are not directly or indirectly involved with the actual sale of an insurance contract and do not receive any commission.

Furthermore, the following individuals are NOT required to hold an insurance producer license:

A director or employee of an insurer whose activities are limited to executive, administrative, managerial, or clerical;
The director or employee of a special agent assisting insurance producers by providing technical advice and assistance to licensed insurance producers;
A person who secures and furnishes information for group insurance or performs administrative services related to mass-marketed property and casualty insurance;
An employer or association engaged in the administration or operation of a program of employee benefits for the employer's or association's own employees;
Employees of insurers or organizations engaging in the inspection, rating or classification of risks, or in the supervision of the training of insurance producers and who are not individually engaged in the sale of insurance;
A person whose activities are limited to advertising without the intent to solicit insurance;
A nonresident who sells, solicits or negotiates a contract of insurance for commercial property and casualty risks to an insured with risks located in more than one state insured under that contract; or
A salaried full-time employee who counsels or advises their employer relative to the insurance interests of the employer or subsidiaries.
3. Maintenance and Duration of License
Renewal
Producer licenses are valid for 2 years. Licenses will expire on the last day of the producer's month of birth. Note that the first term of licenses (that are initially issued) expire on the last day of the producer's birth month in the year that will result in the term of the license being at least 18 months. A renewal license will be issued after a renewal application has been submitted by the producer, along with payment of any required license renewal fees (the current license renewal fee is $20, and $100 for a late renewal).

Individual producers renewing their license must also submit proof of completing 24 hours of approved continuing education (CE) credits during the previous 2 years, with 3 of those hours in courses related to professional ethics.

To renew a producer license, the producer must, at least 10 days before the expiration date, submit a completed renewal application with the renewal fee and a certification signed by the producer, stating that the producer continues to qualify for a license in accordance with the New Jersey law. Failure to submit the renewal application by the expiration date will cause the license to expire.

Any licensee not wishing to renew their license should notify the Department by writing "do not renew" on the face of the renewal application.

Nonresident producers who satisfy CE requirements in their home state are not required to complete CE requirements in New Jersey if their home state recognizes the satisfaction of continuing education requirements on the same basis.

If an applicant's license has lapsed within the past year, the applicant may apply for late renewal of the license within 1 year (12 months) of expiration. To reinstate the license, the producer must provide proof of completing the required CE hours, a late renewal fee of $100, and the applicant's certification, which must state whether or not the applicant has transacted any business as an insurance producer during the unlicensed period and, if so, the number of policies written. An applicant who files a late renewal within one year of license expiration will be granted a waiver from prelicensing education and examination requirements.

A licensed producer may request a waiver of license renewal requirements if the producer is unable to comply with renewal procedures due to military service or other extenuating circumstances, such as a long-term medical disability.

In these cases, the producer may also request a waiver of any examination requirement or fines or sanctions associated with the failure to comply with standard renewal procedures.

Certification of License Status
When requested by any person, the Department will issue a certification of license status of any currently licensed producer or producer licensed within the past 4 years. The certification must contain the following:

Licensee's name, date of birth, license reference number;
Statement whether the license is in force or expired;
Types of insurance for which the person is authorized; and
Whether the person has qualified for licensing by examination or the equivalent, and whether any formal disciplinary act was taken during the last 4 years.


4. License Refusal and Termination
Denial
The Commissioner has the power to deny the issuance or renewal of a license to anyone, based on information contained in that person's application, attached documents, and department records. When denying a license, the Department must specify the reason(s) and advise the applicant of their right to request a hearing.

If a license has been denied, the applicant or producer has the right to request a hearing. The Department will then review the application and any additional information and determine whether the license should be issued. If the Department determines that the applicant is not qualified, the matter becomes a contested case and must be sent to the Office of Administrative Law for a hearing.

Cancellation and Reinstatement
A licensee may terminate a current license at any time by returning the license to the Department for cancellation. The Department may refuse to accept the cancellation request for a producer organization unless all currently licensed officers or partners consent to the request.

A license may be reinstated after cancellation (during the same license period) if the ex-producer completes an application and pays a processing fee. It is not necessary to pay a full licensing fee in the case of reinstatement.

A producer cannot avoid a disciplinary hearing or penalty by submitting their license for cancellation; the disciplinary action will continue.

Revocation and Suspension
In addition to any applicable fines and penalties, the Commissioner may revoke, suspend, refuse to issue, or refuse to renew a license for any of the following reasons:

Willfully violating any provision of the Insurance Code;
Intentionally withholding material information in the license application;
Attempting to obtain a license through misrepresentation or fraud;
Cheating on an examination, including, but not limited to, improperly using notes or any other reference material to complete an examination for an insurance license;
Having an insurance license suspended, revoked or denied in any other state, province, district, or territory;
Committing any fraudulent act;
Misappropriating funds belonging to insureds or insurers;
Materially misrepresenting the conditions of a policy to the insured or applicants;
Paying a rebate to induce business;
Aiding or abetting another producer in violating any insurance law;
Being convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude;
Failing to file or maintain with the Department an accurate business address and list of licensed employees;
Failing to pay a fine imposed by the Commissioner;
Failing to appear in response to a subpoena issued by the Commissioner;
Failing to notify the Commissioner within 30 days of a conviction of a crime, indictment, or filing of a formal charge;
Forgery of another's name to an application for insurance or to any document related to an insurance transaction;
Failing to comply with an administrative or court order imposing a child support obligation;
Failing to pay state income tax or comply with any administrative or court order directing payment of state income tax; and/or
Knowingly accepting business from an unlicensed insurance producer.
No one whose license has been revoked can act as a partner or officer in a producer organization or work in any capacity with a licensed producer.

Failure to maintain a bond in full force will void the authority to act as a surplus lines producer after the bond expires or is cancelled.

All licenses are the property of the State of New Jersey and upon suspension, revocation, or expiration must be returned to the Department.

If a producer's license has been revoked, the producer must wait 5 years before applying for reinstatement. Along with the application, the individual must submit an affidavit that describes how their competence, trustworthiness, reputation, and character have improved during the revocation period. The Commissioner will review the application and determine whether or not reinstatement is warranted.

If the license has been suspended, upon the completion of the suspension period, and upon meeting all conditions for license reinstatement, a former licensee may reapply for an insurance producer license immediately by submitting a properly completed application.

5. Contractual Relationships
Company and Producer
Contractual relations between a producer and an insurance company are conducted through a contract signed by both parties. An insurer authorized to transact insurance business in New Jersey may appoint as its agent anyone who holds a valid producer license.

The appointing insurance company must submit notice of agent appointment to the Department within 15 days after execution of the contract or within 15 days after the first insurance application is submitted by the producer.

The written contract between the insurer (principal) and the producer (agent) must specify the following:

The lines of authority for which the producer may represent the company; and
Duties, responsibilities, and limitations of authority between the producer and the insurer.
The appointing insurer and the appointed producer must maintain a copy of the agency contract. Prior to executing an agency contract, the insurer must determine that the producer is properly licensed with authority for the kinds of insurance described in the contract. The insurer cannot accept any business that was produced before the individual was licensed.

Filing an agency contract means that the producer is that company's producer for all kinds of insurance for which both the company and the producer hold a license. While the producer is licensed, any agency appointment continues in effect until termination.

If an insurer cancels an agency contract, it must notify the Commissioner in writing within 15 days. Failure to do so will imply that an agency contract still exists. Appointing companies must file with the Commissioner a notice of appointment, providing the names of their producers and their addresses.

Producer Substituting for or Taking Over the Business of a Disabled or Deceased Producer
The Commissioner may issue a temporary agent license for a maximum period of 180 days, without requiring an examination, to the following individuals in special circumstances:

In case of death or disability of a licensed agent, to the surviving spouse, a court-appointed personal representative or a member of a business entity;
In case of a licensed agent's entering active U.S. military service, to a designee; or
To any other person when the Commissioner feels the public interest would be best served by issuing such a license.
The Commissioner may limit the temporary licensee's authority and require the temporary licensee to have a suitable licensed sponsor to take responsibility for their actions. Once the owner or personal representative disposes of the insurance producer's business, the temporary license will no longer be active.