Trade Practices
1. Prohibited Practices
Insurers and insurance producers may not engage in any trade practice that is defined as, or determined to be, an unfair method of competition or an unfair or deceptive act or practice in the business of insurance.

It is considered an unfair trade practice to knowingly engage in an unfair method of competition with enough frequency that the commission of unfair marketing practices indicates a general business practice.

If, after a hearing, the Department determines that a producer or an insurer has committed an unfair trade or competition practice, the Department may issue an order requiring the person to cease and desist from engaging in the method of competition, act, or practice, and/or impose penalties for violation of insurance laws.

Misrepresentation
It is illegal to issue, publish, or circulate any illustration or sales material that is false, misleading, or deceptive as to policy benefits or terms, or the payment of dividends. This also refers to verbal statements. Committing this illegal act is called misrepresentation.

False Advertising
Advertising covers a wide scope of communication, from publishing an ad in a newspaper or magazine, to broadcasting a commercial on television or the Internet. Advertisements cannot include any untrue, deceptive, or misleading statements that apply to the business of insurance or anyone who conducts it. The violation of this rule is called false advertising.

It is prohibited to advertise or circulate any materials that are untrue, deceptive, or misleading. False or deceptive advertising specifically includes misrepresenting any of the following:

Terms, benefits, conditions, or advantages of any insurance policy;
Any dividends to be received from the policy, or previously paid out;
Financial condition of any person or the insurance company; or
The true purpose of an assignment or loan against a policy.
Representing an insurance policy as a share of stock, or using names or titles that may misrepresent the true nature of a policy also will be considered false advertising. In addition, a person or an entity cannot use a name that deceptively suggests it is an insurer.

Rebating and Inducement
Rebating is defined as any inducement offered to the insured in the sale of insurance products that is not specified in the policy. Both the offer and acceptance of a rebate are illegal. Rebates may include, but are not limited to, the following:

Rebates of premiums payable on the policy;
Special favors or services;
Advantages in the dividends or other benefits; and
Stocks, bonds, securities, and their dividends or profits.
In New Jersey, promotional materials, articles of merchandise, or gifts that have a redeemable value of less than $100 are not considered "valuable consideration," and therefore, are allowed.

Prohibited rebates or inducements include:

Payments of cash or cash equivalents of greater than $100;
Provision of tickets to a concert or event with a value greater than $100; and
Pertaining to health insurance, COBRA, HRA, HSA, and FSA administration services offered only to new customers who agree to change producers or insurers, which are not otherwise provided to in-force accounts.
Boycott, Coercion, Intimidation
It is illegal to be involved in any activity of boycott, coercion, or intimidation that is intended to restrict fair trade or to create a monopoly. This would include unfair behavior that influences not only clients, but competing agents and brokers.

Coercion is to require, as a condition to a loan, that the applicant purchase insurance from a specific insurer.

Stock Operations and Advisory Board Contract
Insurers and their agents may not issue or deliver agency company stock or other capital stock, or shares in any common-law corporation, or securities of any kind promising returns and profits as an inducement to insurance.


False Financial Statements
False financial statements are those that are intended to deceive public officials or the general public about the financial condition of an insurer. This often occurs when an important fact about the financial status of an insurer is deliberately withheld in order to present the company in a more favorable light.

Defamation
Defamation occurs when an oral or written statement is made that is intended to injure a person engaged in the insurance business. This also applies to statements that are maliciously critical of the financial condition of any person or a company.

Unfair Discrimination
Discrimination in rates, premiums, or policy benefits for persons within the same class or with the same life expectancy is illegal. No discrimination may be made on the basis of an individual's marital status, race, national origin, gender identity, sexual orientation, creed, or ancestry unless the distinction is made for a business purpose or required by law.


0:00


0%
0:00
/
0:40




Failure to Maintain Complaint Handling Procedures
Failure to maintain complaint handling procedures is considered a prohibited trade practice. Insurers must maintain a complete record of all complaints they receive since the date of last examination by the Department. The records must include the total number of complaints, line of insurance and nature of each complaint, action taken and the time it took to process each complaint. The term complaint refers to any written communication expressing a grievance.

Unfair Claim Settlement Practices
The following are unfair claims settlement practices if committed openly and in conscious disregard of rules and regulations, or if committed with such frequency as to indicate a general business practice:

Misrepresenting pertinent facts or insurance policy provisions relating to coverages;
Failing to acknowledge and act reasonably promptly upon communications with respect to claims;
Failing to adopt and implement reasonable standards for the prompt investigation of claims;
Refusing to pay claims without conducting a reasonable investigation based upon all available information;
Failing to affirm or deny coverage of claims within a reasonable time after proof of loss statements have been completed;
Not attempting in good faith to effectuate prompt, fair and equitable settlements of claims in which liability has become reasonably clear;
Compelling insureds to institute litigation to recover amounts due under an insurance policy by offering substantially less than the amounts ultimately recovered in actions brought by such insureds;
Attempting to settle a claim for less than the amount to which a reasonable person would have believed that such person was entitled by reference to written or printed advertising material accompanying or made part of an application;
Attempting to settle claims on the basis of an application which was altered without notice to, or knowledge or consent of the insured;
Making claims payments to insureds or beneficiaries not accompanied by a statement setting forth the coverage under which payments are being made;
Making known to insureds or claimants a policy of appealing from arbitration awards in favor of insureds or claimants for the purpose of compelling them to accept settlements or compromises less than the amount awarded in arbitration;
Delaying the investigation or payment of claims by requiring an insured, claimant or the physician of either to submit a preliminary claim report and then requiring the subsequent submission of formal proof of loss forms, both of which submissions contain substantially the same information;
Failing to promptly settle claims, where liability has become reasonably clear under one portion of the insurance policy coverage in order to influence settlements under other portions of the insurance policy coverage; or
Failing to promptly provide a reasonable explanation of the basis in the insurance policy in relation to the facts or applicable law for denial of a claim or for the offer of a compromise settlement.
2. Licensee Responsibilities (Reporting Information to the Department of Banking and Insurance)
Change of Address
All licensees must provide the Department with a current business mailing address, residence address, phone number and email address. The Department must be notified of any changes of address within 30 days. The change may be submitted electronically. Producers must maintain proof of notification on file for 5 years or until documentation of the change from the Department is received.

Business Names
Resident licensed individual producers may not conduct insurance business under a name other than their legal name unless the name has been filed with and approved by the Department. Nonresident licensed producers may not conduct business under a name other than their legal or business name in the state where they maintain a resident license.

An insurance producer doing business under any name other than the producer's legal name must notify the Commissioner prior to using the assumed name.

A business name is the legal name of a corporation or partnership or any trade or fictitious name under which a licensee conducts insurance business. A business name cannot

Be misleading or deceptive;
Be identical or confusingly similar to the business name of another currently licensed resident producer; or
Imply any affiliation with federal, state or other government entity, or with a nonprofit organization.
If the name contains the word insurance or similar term, it must be used together with words such as agency or brokerage to distinguish the entity from an insurance underwriting company.

 

Branch Offices
A branch office is an office in New Jersey other than a principal office where a resident licensee conducts insurance business. Licensees must register with the Commissioner to obtain a branch office certificate that allows the sale of insurance at that location only. Licensees must file with the Department a branch office registration form within 30 days before business is first conducted there. This certificate expires at the same time as the producer's own license.

The licensee must advise the Department in writing of the closing of any branch office within 30 calendar days of the closing, and return the branch office certificate at that time. No branch office may be opened unless at least one licensed insurance producer is assigned permanently and exclusively to that office during normal working hours. The office must be open to the public during hours and days of the week that would provide reasonable access to the office for the public. The branch office hours of operation must be clearly posted to inform the public. No branch office may engage in insurance related conduct unless a licensed insurance producer is present.

Standards of Conduct
Marketing
Disclosure of personal or privileged information — producers are prohibited from disclosing personal or privileged information about an individual received in connection with an insurance transaction.

Delivery of policy — all policies, certificates or other evidence of insurance that are received by an insurance producer must be delivered or mailed to the insured within 10 calendar days of the receipt by the producer. The producer can only retain a policy for a longer period of time if agreed to in writing by the insured.

Replies to inquiries by the Commissioner — a producer has 15 calendar days to reply in writing to any inquiry of the Department related to the business insurance.

Reporting of claims — claims must be reported to the insurer no later than 5 business days after the receipt of notice of claim by the producer.

Management of Funds
Commingling of funds — all premiums collected on insurance policies must be held by a producer in a fiduciary capacity and must not be misappropriated, illegally withheld or improperly converted to the producer’s own funds. 

Remittance standards — All premiums must be remitted to the insurer within 5 business days after receipt of funds. All premiums due the insured must also be paid to the insured or credited to the insured’s account within 5 business days.

An insurance producer must establish and maintain a trust account for depositing cash, checks and other methods payable to the insurance producer under the following circumstances:

When the producer holds any premiums for more than 5 business days before remitting the premiums to an insurer; or
When the producer deposits any collected premiums into a financial institution account, or otherwise uses the premiums, even though the premiums are remitted within 5 business days.
Record maintenance — At the time of payment, each insurance producer must issue a receipt for each premium for any payment, premium deposit or installment payment and maintain a copy of each receipt issued. All completed receipt books must be retained for a minimum of 5 years from the date of completion. All other books and records of each account must be maintained for a period of 5 years after the termination of coverage.

Commissions and Compensation
No insurance company or agent may pay a commission, service fee, or other valuable consideration to a person for selling, soliciting, or negotiating insurance in this state if that person is not properly licensed.

No one may accept a commission, service fee, or other valuable consideration for selling, soliciting, or negotiating insurance in this state if that person is required to be licensed and is not so licensed.

Renewal or other deferred commissions may be paid to a person for selling, soliciting, or negotiating insurance in this state if the person was properly licensed at the time of the transaction.

Administrative Procedures and Penalties
If a producer has violated a New Jersey law regarding Standards of Conduct, the Department may impose an administrative penalty upon the producer. Prior to that, the Department must send a notice by certified mail or personal delivery to the last known business or mailing address of the alleged violator. The notice must include the following information:

A reference to the statute, rule, or administrative order violated;
A brief statement of the facts that constitute the violation;
A statement of the administrative penalty; and
A statement advising the alleged violator of the right to a hearing, as well as the procedure for requesting a hearing.
The person in violation has 20 calendar days from the service of the notice to request a hearing in writing. If the hearing request does not include a specific admission, denial or explanation of each fact of the alleged violation, the statements in the notice will be deemed to have been admitted.

Failure to respond to the notice by the producer will be deemed an admission to all the allegations and charges in the notice, and no further proceeding will be required prior to the final order that imposes the administrative penalty. If the notice provides for the payment of a fine, restitution or other reimbursement, and the payment is not received, the producer's license may be suspended or revoked.