Definitions
1. Types of Insurers
The insurer (or principal) is the company or organization that issues a policy of insurance.

Insurance companies can be classified in a variety of ways based on ownership, authority to transact business, location of incorporation (domicile), marketing and distribution systems, or rating (financial strength).

As you read about different classifications of insurers, keep in mind that these categories are not mutually exclusive, and the same company can be described based on where it is located and allowed to transact the business of insurance, who owns it, and what type of agents it appoints.

Ownership
The following are the most common types of ownership.

Stock Companies
Stock companies are owned by the stockholders who provide the capital necessary to establish and operate the insurance company and who share in any profits or losses. Officers are elected by the stockholders and manage stock insurance companies. Traditionally, stock companies issue nonparticipating policies, in which policyowners do not share in profits or losses.

A nonparticipating (stock) policy does not pay dividends to policyowners; however, taxable dividends are paid to stockholders. The dividends are not guaranteed as they are based on company profit.

Mutual Companies
Mutual companies are owned by the policyowners and issue participating policies. With participating policies, policyowners are entitled to dividends, which, in the case of mutual companies, are a return of excess premiums and are, therefore, nontaxable. Dividends are generated when the premiums and the earnings combined exceed the actual costs of providing coverage, creating a surplus. Dividends are not guaranteed.


0:00


0%
0:00
/
0:20




Domestic, Foreign and Alien Insurers
Insurance companies are classified according to the location of incorporation (domicile). Regardless of where an insurance company is incorporated, it must obtain a Certificate of Authority before transacting insurance within the state.

Know This
A domicile refers to the location where an insurer is incorporated, not necessarily where the insurer conducts business.
A domestic insurer is an insurance company that is incorporated in this state. In most cases, the company's home office is in the state in which it was formed — the company's domicile. For instance, a company chartered in Pennsylvania would be considered a Pennsylvania domestic company.

A foreign insurer is an insurance company that is incorporated in another state, the District of Columbia, or a territorial possession. Currently, the United States has 5 major U.S. territories: American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

For example, a company chartered in California would be a foreign insurer within the state of New York. A company chartered in Puerto Rico will be foreign in any U.S. state.

An alien insurer is an insurance company that is incorporated outside the United States.

Certificate of Authority
Before insurers may transact business in a specific state, they must apply for and be granted a license or Certificate of Authority from the state department of insurance and meet any financial (capital and surplus) requirements set by the state. Insurers who meet the state's financial requirements and are approved to transact business in the state are considered authorized or admitted into the state as a legal insurer. Those insurers who have not been approved to do business in the state are considered unauthorized or nonadmitted. Most states have laws that prohibit unauthorized insurers from conducting business in the state, except through licensed excess and surplus lines brokers.

Know This
Insurers must obtain a Certificate of Authority prior to transacting business in this state.


2. Types of Producers
Insurance Agent
An insurance agent is an insurance producer acting as an agent authorized in writing by any insurance company to solicit, negotiate or sell insurance contracts, or collect premiums on its behalf. The agent is also authorized to countersign insurance policies on the company's behalf. The agents are deemed to represent the insurer.

Insurance Broker
When an insurance producer negotiates for an insurance contract on behalf of a client, the producer is acting as a broker. An insurance broker acts as a representative of an insured or prospective insured, and helps with insurance transactions on the insured's behalf for a commissions, brokerage fee, or other consideration.

Insurance Consultant
An insurance consultant is a person who, for a fee, commission, or other consideration, offers any advice, counsel, opinion, or service regarding the benefits, advantages, or disadvantages of any insurance policy issued in this state. Not included in the insurance consultant's definition are bank trust officers, attorneys, and certified public accountants who negotiate contracts on behalf of others, or who provide general financial counsel, if no commission or brokerage fee is paid for those services.

3. Insurance Transactions
The term insurance transaction includes any of the following (by mail or any other means):

Solicitation;
Negotiations;
Sale (effectuation of a contract of insurance); and
Advising an individual concerning coverage or claims.
Sell means to exchange a contract or policy of insurance by any means, for money or its equivalent, on behalf of an insurer.

Solicit means to attempt to sell insurance or ask or urge a person to apply for a specific type of insurance from a particular insurer.

Negotiate means the act of directly conferring with or offering advice to a purchaser or prospective purchaser of a particular contract or policy of insurance concerning any of the benefits, terms or conditions, provided that the person engaged in that act either sells insurance or obtains insurance from insurers for purchasers.

A person may not sell, solicit or negotiate insurance in this state unless licensed for that line of authority.

The New Jersey law defines another term related to transacting of insurance - insurance-related conduct, which includes the following:

Selling, soliciting, negotiating and binding insurance policies;
All communication with the insured concerning any terms and conditions of a policy;
Office management policies affecting insureds;
Processing claims; and
Transmitting funds between the insured, producers, premium finance companies and insurance companies.
4. Reinsurance
Reinsurance is a contract under which one insurance company (the reinsurer) indemnifies another insurance company for part or all of its liabilities. The purpose of reinsurance is to protect insurers against catastrophic losses. The originating company that procures insurance on itself from another insurer is called the ceding insurer (because it cedes, or gives, the risk to the reinsurer). The other insurer is called the assuming insurer, or reinsurer.

When a reinsurer, or assuming insurer, has taken on too many risks and must spread some of its liabilities to other reinsurers is called extended reinsurance, also referred to as retrocession.