State Regulatory Jurisdiction
1. Legislation
State Laws
Insurance is an industry that is vested in the public interest. This means that insurance is a business which affects many people, and the public welfare demands that the industry be regulated in its activities. As a result, the insurance industry is highly-regulated by state and federal entities in virtually every facet of its operation. Most of the regulations are state-imposed by the passage of specific insurance statutes and rules, as outlined in the New Jersey Permanent Statutes and the New Jersey Administrative Code.

Court Action
Interpretations
The complicated nature of insurance contracts makes them difficult for the insured to comprehend. Few individuals read their insurance policies, and even fewer would understand what they had read. Therefore, in the event of a claim for loss under a policy (other than life insurance), there is often misinterpretation by an insured as to the policy coverages and limitations. When such misunderstanding cannot be resolved by the insurer and insured, courts are asked to interpret the contract.

Effect on Law and Policy Forms
Court decisions resolving conflicts related to insurance coverage, in addition to resolving the issue at hand, often become a precedent as to how future claims will be settled. Often, because of a court interpretation, a regulation or change in the policy form is necessary to clarify the intent of the policy.

Related Federal Laws and Court Cases
Paul vs. Virginia
The case of Paul vs. Virginia was an important precedent concerning the regulation of insurance. Samuel Paul was a native of Virginia who represented New York insurance companies in his state. Paul challenged the right of the state to regulate insurance by refusing to obtain a license from the state. When he continued to sell insurance without a license, he was arrested and fined $50. The case was carried all the way to the United States Supreme Court, where it was finally decided in 1869. In rendering its decision, the Supreme Court stated that insurance was not interstate commerce.

The decision of the United States Supreme Court that insurance was not interstate commerce, and therefore was not subject to regulation by the federal government, stood for 75 years.

U.S. vs. South-Eastern Underwriters Association
After a period of 75 years, the federal government's authority to regulate insurance was tested once again. In 1942, the Attorney General of the United States filed a brief on the Sherman Act against the South-Eastern Underwriters Association (SEUA), a cooperative rating bureau, alleging that the bureau constituted a combination in restraint of trade. In its decision of the SEUA case in 1944, the Supreme Court reversed its decision of Paul vs. Virginia, stating that insurance is interstate commerce and is therefore subject to regulation by the federal government. This decision stands today.

McCarran-Ferguson Act and Public Law 15
During the period of time that the SEUA case was being decided and appealed, the insurance industry arranged to have bills introduced into Congress which would have exempted the insurance industry from the provisions of the antitrust laws. These bills were all defeated, but finally a bill drafted by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners was passed. This bill was Public Law 15 or the McCarran-Ferguson Act, which became law on March 9, 1945. Congress insisted that it was the right of the federal government to regulate the insurance industry but stated in the McCarran Act that the federal government would not regulate insurance as long as the states did an adequate job of regulating the industry. In addition, the law declared a 2-year moratorium on the regulation of insurance by the federal government and stated that the federal government would not regulate the industry until after January 1, 1948, at which time it would do so to the extent that the industry was not being regulated by the several states. Following the enactment of Public Law 15, the several states attempted to put their houses in order, enacting rating laws, fair trade practices, and extending the licensing and solvency requirements.

In the McCarran-Ferguson Act, Congress reaffirmed the right of the federal government to regulate insurance, but it deferred some of this authority to the states. In effect, the law explicitly grants to the states the right to regulate insurance, a power that the Supreme Court in the SEUA case had concluded was vested in Congress under the commerce clause of the Constitution. The exemption from federal law was not complete, however. Public Law 15 provided that the Sherman Act would continue to apply to boycott, coercion, or intimidation.

Today, insurance is regulated by each state through the three basic branches of government: the legislative, judicial, and executive branches.

2. Department of Banking and Insurance/Commissioner
The Department of Banking and Insurance was created to execute all laws relative to insurance, banking, savings, trust, guarantee, safe deposit, indemnity, mortgage, investment and loan corporations. The Department has been divided into two separate principal departments, the Department of Banking and the Department of Insurance, with a Commissioner as the head of each department. The Commissioner of Insurance is the administrator and chief executive officer of the Department of Insurance.

The Commissioner is appointed by the Governor, with the advice and consent of the Senate, and serves at the pleasure of the Governor during the Governor's term of office and until the appointment and qualification of the Commissioner's successor.

Broad Powers of Commissioner
In accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act, the Commissioner has the authority to make and enforce rules and regulations to implement and carry out the purposes of the Insurance laws of New Jersey.

The Commissioner has the authority and the obligation to do the following:

Administer the Department's work;
Appoint and remove officers and other personnel employed within the Department;
Perform, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers, and duties of the Department through any divisions established by law;
Organize the work of the Department under any structural or organizational units the Commissioner determines to be necessary for efficient and effective operation;
Formulate, adopt, and issue rules and regulations for the efficient conduct of the work and general administration of the Department, and for the appropriate regulation of the institutions, companies, agencies, boards, commissions, and other entities within its jurisdiction, including licensees;
Determine all matters of policy or processes necessary to enforce properly and give effect to any of the Commissioner's powers or duties;
Make an annual report to the Governor and to the Legislature about the Department's operations for the preceding fiscal year;
Appoint advisory committees as necessary to advise and assist the Department or any division in carrying out its functions and duties;
Perform any other functions required by the Insurance Code or other law; and
Maintain suitable headquarters for the Department and such other quarters as the Commissioner deems necessary for the proper functioning of the Department.
The Commissioner may not have ownership of, interest in, or any transactions in any capacity with any financial institution or insurance company licensed or regulated by the Department, except in the strict performance of the Commissioner’s duties.



Notice and Hearing
Because the Commissioner's role is to enforce insurance laws and to protect the public from unfair trade practices, if the Commissioner suspects that an insurer or its agent has committed a violation or is engaged in an unfair trade practice, the Commissioner may issue a statement of charges and hold a hearing for any purpose deemed necessary (within the scope of the Insurance Code).

The Commissioner has the power to conduct investigations, administer oaths, interrogate licensees, and issue subpoenas to any licensee or other person in connection with any investigation, hearing, or other proceeding. Upon appropriate notice, the Commissioner may summon the attendance of witnesses and the production of related books, records, accounts, papers, and other documents. Anyone failing to comply with the subpoena may be ordered by the New Jersey Superior Court to comply with the terms of the subpoena or be punished by the court for contempt.

If the Commissioner believes that a licensed person has violated an insurance regulation or is engaged in any unfair trade practice, the Commissioner has the right to call a disciplinary hearing, and will provide the person charged with a 10 days' written notice of the date, time, and place for the hearing.

Penalties
After the hearing, the Commissioner will determine if a violation has occurred. If so, the Commissioner will issue a cease and desist order, which requires the person to stop the unlawful action. The Commissioner may also levy a fine of up to $1,000 for each charge of violations of fair methods of competition laws or engaging in an unfair trade practice. If the Commissioner determines that the person has willfully and knowingly violated the law, the fine can be increased to $5,000 per charge.

Any person who violates a cease and desist order after it has become final will be required to pay to the State of New Jersey a fine up to $5,000 for each violation. The Commissioner can turn the matter over to the New Jersey Superior Court for further legal action, and can assess a fine of up to $5,000 for each violation.

Any person who violates an insurance law or regulation is liable to a penalty of  up to $5,000 for a first offense, and up to $10,000 for each subsequent offense. The Commissioner or a court may also order restitution of moneys owed and reimbursement of the costs of investigation and prosecution. These penalties are separate from the cease and desist order or violation of a cease and desist order.